README.md, before:

# CleanSlate

A command-line tool that recursively examines directories to find and optionally clean build artifacts and cache files from various programming languages.

## Features

- Scans directories recursively to identify build artifacts and caches
- Respects `.gitignore` patterns
- Detects projects by looking for common project indicators
- Groups artifacts by project
- Calculates total size of artifacts
- Optionally deletes identified artifacts
- Colorized output

## Supported Languages

CleanSlate identifies common artifacts from:

- **Python**: `__pycache__`, `.pytest_cache`, `.mypy_cache`, `.ruff_cache`, `.venv`, `*.pyc`, `*.egg-info`, etc.
- **JavaScript/TypeScript**: `node_modules`, `.next`, `.nuxt`, `.svelte-kit`, `.npm`, `.cache`, etc.
- **Rust**: `.cargo` cache
- **Go**: `/vendor` (at project root)
- **Ruby**: `.bundle`, `vendor/bundle`
- **Swift/Xcode**: `DerivedData`, `/.build`, `*.xcworkspace/xcuserdata`
- **Java/JVM**: `.gradle`, `.m2`, `/classes`
- **C/C++**: `*.o`, `*.so`, `*.dll`, `CMakeFiles`, etc.
- **Dart/Flutter**: `.dart_tool`, `.pub-cache`
- **Haskell**: `.stack-work`, `dist-newstyle`
- **General**: `.DS_Store`, `Thumbs.db`, `tmp`, `logs`, `.idea`, etc.

## Pattern Syntax

CleanSlate uses a pattern system defined in `artifacts.toml`. Understanding the pattern syntax helps you know what will be detected:

### Pattern Types

1. **Root-level patterns** (with `/` prefix): Only match at project root
   - Example: `/build` matches `<project-root>/build` but NOT `<project-root>/src/build`
   - Used for: `/target`, `/dist`, `/out`, `/bin`, `/coverage`, `/vendor`, etc.

2. **Anywhere patterns** (no `/` prefix): Match at any depth
   - Example: `tmp` matches any directory named `tmp` anywhere in the tree
   - Used for: `node_modules`, `__pycache__`, `tmp`, `logs`, `.DS_Store`, etc.

3. **Wildcard patterns**: Simple glob matching
   - Example: `*.pyc` matches any file ending in `.pyc`
   - Example: `yarn-*.log` matches `yarn-debug.log`, `yarn-error.log`, etc.

### Project Root Detection

CleanSlate determines project roots by looking for:
- `Cargo.toml` (Rust)
- `pyproject.toml` (Python)
- `package.json` (JavaScript/Node)
- `go.mod` (Go)
- `.git` (Git repository)
- `.jj` (Jujutsu repository)

This ensures that `/build` patterns only match at the actual project root, not in subdirectories.

## Safety Features

- **Version Control Aware**: Files tracked in Git or Jujutsu are never removed, even if they match artifact patterns
- **VCS Directory Skip**: Never scans inside version control directories (`.git`, `.jj`, `.svn`, `.hg`, `.bzr`, `_darcs`, `.pijul`, `CVS`, `.fossil`)
- **Respects `.gitignore`**: Uses gitignore patterns to skip files
- **Symlink Safe**: Never follows or deletes symlinks
- **Dry Run Mode**: Use `--dry-run` to see what would be deleted without actually deleting

## Important Notes

- **Cargo.lock**: Not treated as an artifact (correctly committed for binary projects)
- **.vscode**: Not treated as an artifact (teams often commit IDE settings)
- **node_modules**: Matches anywhere (supports monorepos with nested packages)

## Installation

```bash
cargo install cleanslate
```

Or build from source:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/osteele/cleanslate.git
cd cleanslate
cargo install --path .
```

## Usage

```bash
# Scan current directory (shows table by default)
cleanslate

# Scan specific directories
cleanslate /path/to/dir1 /path/to/dir2

# Preview what would be deleted (dry run)
cleanslate --dry-run

# Show detailed list format instead of table
cleanslate --list

# Show verbose output with individual files
cleanslate -v --files

# Delete artifacts
cleanslate --delete
```

## Options

- `[PATHS]...`: Directories to scan (defaults to current directory)
- `-d, --delete`: Delete the found artifacts
- `-v, --verbose`: Show detailed information about found artifacts
- `-f, --files`: Show individual files instead of summary per directory
- `--dry-run`: Show what would be deleted without actually deleting (implies --delete)
- `-l, --list`: Show detailed list format instead of table (table is default)
- `-h, --help`: Print help
- `-V, --version`: Print version

## Output Format

By default, cleanslate displays results in a clean table format:

- **Path**: Relative path from scan directory
- **Removable**: Size of artifacts that would be removed (highlighted in bold red if >100 MiB)
- **Total**: Total project size including all files
- **What**: List of artifacts to be removed (large items >50 MiB shown in bold, truncated with `...` to fit terminal width)

Large projects (>500 MiB total) are highlighted in bold yellow.

## License

MIT License

## Author

Oliver Steele

Commit message:

feat: Enhance traversal optimization and introduce hybrid time filtering
- Refactor `README.md` to clarify that `.gitignore` is used for traversal optimization and not for removal decisions.
- Introduce a hybrid time filtering strategy in `docs/architecture.md` which uses directory-level mtime for recreatable directories and per-file mtime for others. This optimizes performance while maintaining intuitive behavior for different directory types.
- Update `src/main.rs` to implement the hybrid time filtering logic.
- Remove the `--files` flag as it is no longer necessary with the new time filtering display.
- Update `src/main.rs` to enable `.gitignore`, `.ignore`, global gitignore, and `.git/info/exclude` for traversal optimization.
- Update tests in `tests/cli.rs` to reflect changes in output, specifically regarding verbose output and the absence of the `--files` flag.

README.md, after:

# CleanSlate

A command-line tool that recursively examines directories to find and optionally clean build artifacts and cache files from various programming languages.

## Features

- Scans directories recursively to identify build artifacts and caches
- Respects `.gitignore` patterns
- Detects projects by looking for common project indicators
- Groups artifacts by project
- Calculates total size of artifacts
- Optionally deletes identified artifacts
- Colorized output

## Supported Languages

CleanSlate identifies common artifacts from:

- **Python**: `__pycache__`, `.pytest_cache`, `.mypy_cache`, `.ruff_cache`, `.venv`, `*.pyc`, `*.egg-info`, etc.
- **JavaScript/TypeScript**: `node_modules`, `.next`, `.nuxt`, `.svelte-kit`, `.npm`, `.cache`, etc.
- **Rust**: `.cargo` cache
- **Go**: `/vendor` (at project root)
- **Ruby**: `.bundle`, `vendor/bundle`
- **Swift/Xcode**: `DerivedData`, `/.build`, `*.xcworkspace/xcuserdata`
- **Java/JVM**: `.gradle`, `.m2`, `/classes`
- **C/C++**: `*.o`, `*.so`, `*.dll`, `CMakeFiles`, etc.
- **Dart/Flutter**: `.dart_tool`, `.pub-cache`
- **Haskell**: `.stack-work`, `dist-newstyle`
- **General**: `.DS_Store`, `Thumbs.db`, `tmp`, `logs`, `.idea`, etc.

## Pattern Syntax

CleanSlate uses a pattern system defined in `artifacts.toml`. Understanding the pattern syntax helps you know what will be detected:

### Pattern Types

1. **Root-level patterns** (with `/` prefix): Only match at project root
   - Example: `/build` matches `<project-root>/build` but NOT `<project-root>/src/build`
   - Used for: `/target`, `/dist`, `/out`, `/bin`, `/coverage`, `/vendor`, etc.

2. **Anywhere patterns** (no `/` prefix): Match at any depth
   - Example: `tmp` matches any directory named `tmp` anywhere in the tree
   - Used for: `node_modules`, `__pycache__`, `tmp`, `logs`, `.DS_Store`, etc.

3. **Wildcard patterns**: Simple glob matching
   - Example: `*.pyc` matches any file ending in `.pyc`
   - Example: `yarn-*.log` matches `yarn-debug.log`, `yarn-error.log`, etc.

### Project Root Detection

CleanSlate determines project roots by looking for:
- `Cargo.toml` (Rust)
- `pyproject.toml` (Python)
- `package.json` (JavaScript/Node)
- `go.mod` (Go)
- `.git` (Git repository)
- `.jj` (Jujutsu repository)

This ensures that `/build` patterns only match at the actual project root, not in subdirectories.

## Safety Features

- **Version Control Aware**: Files tracked in Git or Jujutsu are never removed, even if they match artifact patterns
- **VCS Directory Skip**: Never scans inside version control directories (`.git`, `.jj`, `.svn`, `.hg`, `.bzr`, `_darcs`, `.pijul`, `CVS`, `.fossil`)
- **Traversal Optimization**: Uses `.gitignore` patterns to skip directories during scanning (but removal decisions are based on VCS tracking status, not gitignore)
- **Symlink Safe**: Never follows or deletes symlinks
- **Dry Run Mode**: Use `--dry-run` to see what would be deleted without actually deleting

## Important Notes

- **Cargo.lock**: Not treated as an artifact (correctly committed for binary projects)
- **.vscode**: Not treated as an artifact (teams often commit IDE settings)
- **node_modules**: Matches anywhere (supports monorepos with nested packages)

## Installation

```bash
cargo install cleanslate
```

Or build from source:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/osteele/cleanslate.git
cd cleanslate
cargo install --path .
```

## Usage

```bash
# Scan current directory (shows table by default)
cleanslate

# Scan specific directories
cleanslate /path/to/dir1 /path/to/dir2

# Preview what would be deleted (dry run)
cleanslate --dry-run

# Show detailed list format instead of table
cleanslate --list

# Show verbose output with individual files
cleanslate -v --files

# Delete artifacts
cleanslate --delete
```

## Options

- `[PATHS]...`: Directories to scan (defaults to current directory)
- `-d, --delete`: Delete the found artifacts
- `-v, --verbose`: Show detailed information about found artifacts
- `--dry-run`: Show what would be deleted without actually deleting (implies --delete)
- `-l, --list`: Show detailed list format instead of table (table is default)
- `-h, --help`: Print help
- `-V, --version`: Print version

## Output Format

By default, cleanslate displays results in a clean table format:

- **Path**: Relative path from scan directory
- **Removable**: Size of artifacts that would be removed (highlighted in bold red if >100 MiB)
- **Total**: Total project size including all files
- **What**: List of artifacts to be removed (large items >50 MiB shown in bold, truncated with `...` to fit terminal width)

Large projects (>500 MiB total) are highlighted in bold yellow.

## License

MIT License

## Author

Oliver Steele
