docs/architecture.md, before:

# CleanSlate Architecture

## Overview

CleanSlate is a **selective** artifact cleaner that removes build artifacts and caches based on two criteria:
1. File matches an artifact pattern (from `artifacts.toml`)
2. File is not tracked in version control

**This is NOT the same as `git clean`**, which removes all untracked files regardless of whether they're artifacts.

### Why Not Just Use `git clean`?

`git clean` removes **all** untracked files, including:
- New source files you're working on
- Configuration files you haven't committed yet
- Any other untracked content

CleanSlate is **surgical**: it only removes things that match known artifact patterns (like `node_modules`, `*.pyc`, `target/`, etc.), leaving your untracked work files alone.

## Layered Removal Strategy

CleanSlate uses a multi-layer decision process for whether to remove a file or directory:

### Layer 1: Pattern Matching (artifacts.toml)
- Does the file/directory path match any pattern in `artifacts.toml`?
- Patterns include: `node_modules`, `*.pyc`, `target`, `__pycache__`, etc.
- If NO match → keep the file (even if untracked)
- If match → proceed to Layer 2

### Layer 2: VCS Tracking Status
- Is the file tracked in version control (git/jj)?
- Checked via `git ls-files` or `jj file list` (NOT gitignore!)
- If tracked → keep the file (overrides pattern match)
- If untracked → proceed to Layer 3

### Layer 3: Directory Category
Based on directory type, use different performance optimizations:
- **VCS Internals**: Never traverse (`.git`, `.jj`, etc.)
- **Recreatable Dirs**: Spot-check for any tracked files (`node_modules`, `.venv`, etc.)
- **Other Dirs**: Batch-check all files

### Example Decision Tree

```
src/app.js (untracked)
  → Layer 1: No pattern match
  → Result: KEEP (not an artifact)

node_modules/lib.js (tracked in git)
  → Layer 1: Matches "node_modules" pattern ✓
  → Layer 2: Tracked in git
  → Result: KEEP (tracking overrides pattern)

node_modules/new-lib.js (untracked)
  → Layer 1: Matches "node_modules" pattern ✓
  → Layer 2: Not tracked in git ✓
  → Result: REMOVE (pattern + untracked)

.git/config
  → Layer 1: Matches VCS internals
  → Layer 3: Category 1 (VCS internal)
  → Result: SKIP (never remove)
```

## Directory Removal Strategy

### Three Directory Categories

#### Category 1: VCS Internals (Never Remove, Skip Traversal)
**Directories:** `.git`, `.jj`, `.svn`, `.hg`, `.bzr`, `_darcs`, `.pijul`, `CVS`, `.fossil`

**Strategy:** Skip during traversal entirely. These are never removable.

**Code location:** `src/main.rs:497-510`, `src/main.rs:581`

**Why:** These contain version control metadata and must never be touched.

#### Category 2: Recreatable Directories (Spot-Check, Remove if Untracked)
**Directories:** `node_modules`, `.venv`, `venv`, `env`, `target`, `__pycache__`, `.pytest_cache`, `.mypy_cache`, `.ruff_cache`, `.gradle`, `.m2`, `vendor/bundle`, `.dart_tool`, etc.

**Strategy:** These can be recreated from manifest files (package.json, requirements.txt, Cargo.toml, etc.)
- Check if directory contains ANY tracked files (single VCS call with early exit)
- If yes → skip directory entirely (unusual but valid case where someone committed node_modules)
- If no → remove entire directory without traversing contents

**Performance:** 1 VCS call vs N calls for N files (10,000x+ speedup for large directories)

**Code location:** `src/main.rs:~60` (directory list), `src/main.rs:~600-663` (handling logic)

**Why this works:** These directories are conventionally never tracked, so the spot-check almost always finds no tracked files and we can skip the expensive traversal.

#### Category 3: Other Directories (Batch-Check Contents)
**Definition:** Any directory not in categories 1 or 2.

**Strategy:**
- Batch-check all files in directory with single VCS call
- Remove untracked files that match artifact patterns
- Cleanup empty directories recursively

**Performance:** 1 VCS call per directory vs N calls for N files

**Code location:** `src/main.rs:~600-700`

**Why this is needed:** Custom project directories may contain a mix of artifacts and source files, so we need file-level granularity.

## Critical Semantic Rule: VCS Tracking vs Gitignore

### The Core Logic

**Files are removed when BOTH conditions are true:**
1. File matches an artifact pattern (defined in `artifacts.toml`)
2. File is NOT tracked in version control

This is checked in the layered approach described above.

### Why This Matters

Git and Jujutsu **only track files, not directories**:
- An empty directory cannot be committed
- To check if a directory is "tracked", we check if it contains any tracked files

### Common Pitfall: Don't Use Gitignore for Removal!

**Gitignore ≠ Untracked**

A file's gitignore status is NOT the same as its tracking status:
- **A file can be tracked even if it's in `.gitignore`** (if it was added before the ignore rule was created)
- A file can be untracked but NOT in `.gitignore`
- Gitignore only affects whether NEW files get auto-tracked

**Why this is critical:**
If someone committed `node_modules/` before adding it to `.gitignore`, those files are TRACKED. Using gitignore would incorrectly mark them for removal, potentially deleting important tracked files.

**Examples:**
```
# node_modules/lib.js is tracked in git (someone committed it)
→ KEEP (Layer 2: tracking overrides pattern)

# node_modules/new.js is untracked
→ REMOVE (Layer 1 + Layer 2: pattern + untracked)

# src/app.js is untracked
→ KEEP (Layer 1: doesn't match artifact pattern)
```

### The Role of the `ignore` Crate

The `ignore` crate (used via `WalkBuilder`) is **ONLY for traversal optimization**, NOT for removal decisions.

It helps us skip directories during traversal (respects `.gitignore`), but we **must** query VCS tracking status via `git ls-files` or `jj file list` to make removal decisions.

**Why we use it:** If `.gitignore` says to ignore `node_modules`, the `WalkBuilder` won't traverse into it, saving time. But this is just an optimization - the removal decision still requires checking VCS tracking.

## VCS Checking Strategy

### Why Spot-Check Works for Category 2

Since git/jj only track files, checking if a directory is "untracked" means:
```bash
# If this returns nothing, directory has no tracked files
git ls-files node_modules | head -1
jj file list 'node_modules' | head -1
```

This avoids traversing 10,000+ files when we only need a yes/no answer.

**Key insight:** For conventionally-untracked directories like `node_modules`, this check almost always returns nothing immediately, giving us a 10,000x speedup.

### Batch Checking for Category 3

For other directories, we need file-level granularity:
```bash
# Get all tracked files in one call
git ls-files some-directory
jj file list --ignore-working-copy 'glob:"some-directory/**"'
```

Then check each file against this cached set (O(1) lookup).

### VCS Detection Priority

When both `.jj` and `.git` are present:
1. **Prefer Jujutsu** (`.jj` takes precedence)
2. Use `jj file list --ignore-working-copy` (faster, skips snapshot)
3. Fall back to Git only if `.jj` not found

**Why prefer jj:** Per user configuration in `.claude/CLAUDE.md`, when both exist, use jj.

## Performance Impact

### Before Optimization
- **O(N) subprocess calls** where N = total files in artifact directories
- Example: `node_modules` with 10,000 files = 10,000 subprocess calls
- Result: **Hangs for minutes or hours**

### After Optimization
- **Category 1:** O(0) - skipped during traversal
- **Category 2:** O(1) subprocess call per directory (spot-check with early exit)
- **Category 3:** O(1) subprocess call per directory (batch check)
- Example: `node_modules` with 10,000 files = 1 subprocess call
- Result: **Completes in seconds**

### Expected Speedup
- Large projects: **100-10,000x speedup**
- Typical project: **10-100x speedup**

## Empty Directory Cleanup

After removing files, directories may become empty. The cleanup pass:
1. Collects all parent directories of removed files/directories
2. Sorts directories by depth (deepest first)
3. Checks if directory is empty OR only contains `.DS_Store`/`Thumbs.db`
4. Removes empty directories
5. Recursively removes parent directories that become empty

**Why this matters:** Removing files from `src/build/output/file.o` should also remove the empty `output/` and `build/` directories if they become empty.

**Code location:** `src/main.rs:~720-795`

## Time-Based Filtering Strategy

CleanSlate supports filtering artifacts by modification time using `--older-than` and `--modified-before` flags. The implementation uses a **hybrid approach** that balances performance with intuitive behavior.

### Hybrid Time Filtering

**Category 2 Directories (Recreatable)**: Uses **directory-level mtime** check
- Check the directory's modification time once before spot-checking
- If directory passes time filter → proceed with spot-check and potential removal
- If directory fails → skip entirely (mark as time_filtered)
- **Rationale:** These are atomic units treated as a whole. Directory mtime reflects recent activity within.
- **Performance:** Maintains the 10,000x speedup by avoiding file-level traversal

**Category 3 Directories (Other)**: Uses **per-file mtime** check
- Each untracked file's mtime is checked individually during traversal
- Only files that pass the time filter are added to the removal list
- **Rationale:** These directories mix artifacts with source files; per-file filtering is more intuitive
- **Performance:** Minor impact since we're already traversing to check VCS status

### Why Hybrid?

The two-tier approach optimizes for different use cases:

1. **Build artifacts** (`target/`, `node_modules/`, `.venv/`): Typically managed as units
   - "Remove this entire cache if it hasn't been touched in 30 days"
   - Directory mtime is sufficient and avoids traversal overhead

2. **Mixed directories** (custom build outputs): Need file-level precision
   - "Remove old .o files but keep recent ones"
   - Per-file mtime provides the expected behavior

### Implementation Details

**Directory-level check** (Category 2):
```rust
// Check once per directory before handling
let passes_time_filter = if time_filter.is_active() {
    if let Ok(metadata) = fs::symlink_metadata(path) {
        if let Ok(mtime) = metadata.modified() {
            time_filter.passes(mtime)
        } else { true }
    } else { true }
} else { true };
```

**Per-file check** (Category 3):
```rust
// Check each file individually during traversal
for entry in walkdir::WalkDir::new(path) {
    let file_passes_time_filter = if time_filter.is_active() {
        if let Ok(meta) = fs::symlink_metadata(file_path) {
            if let Ok(mtime) = meta.modified() {
                time_filter.passes(mtime)
            } else { true }
        } else { true }
    } else { true };

    if file_passes_time_filter {
        files_to_remove.push(file_path);
    }
}
```

### Directory mtime Semantics

On Unix-like systems, a directory's mtime updates when:
- Files are added to the directory
- Files are removed from the directory
- Files are renamed within the directory
- Directory metadata (permissions, etc.) changes

The directory mtime does NOT update when:
- File contents are modified (only the file's mtime changes)
- Subdirectories' contents change (only subdirectory's mtime changes)

For Category 2 artifacts, this is usually acceptable since installing/updating dependencies (the primary use case) modifies the directory structure.

**Code location:** `src/main.rs:~963-989` (directory-level), `src/main.rs:~1087-1100` (per-file)

Commit message:

refactor: Disable gitignore processing for performance
The `ignore` crate and its `.gitignore` processing functionality have been disabled in the file walker. This change is motivated by performance considerations and the realization that gitignore rules do not align with the tool's core logic for identifying files to remove.

Previously, the `ignore` crate was enabled for traversal optimization, respecting `.gitignore` and `.ignore` files. However, this added significant overhead, especially in large codebases with numerous ignore files. The parsing and processing of these files consumed substantial I/O and CPU resources without providing a direct benefit to the tool's functionality for several reasons:

- The tool relies on `artifacts.toml` for defining patterns of files to remove, not on `.gitignore`.
- Version control directories (`.git`, `.jj`, etc.) are already explicitly skipped by `VCS_INTERNALS`.
- The authoritative source for determining whether a file is tracked and subject to removal is the output of VCS commands like `git ls-files` or `jj file list`.

By disabling gitignore processing entirely, the tool avoids this performance overhead and streamlines its traversal logic, focusing solely on VCS tracking status and artifact patterns for accurate file management.

- Disabled `.gitignore` processing in `src/main.rs` for both `discover_projects_streaming` and the main artifact scanning loop.
- Updated README.md to clarify that removal decisions are based on artifact patterns and VCS tracking, not `.gitignore`.
- Updated `docs/architecture.md` to explain the rationale behind disabling gitignore processing, detailing the performance overhead and lack of benefit.

docs/architecture.md, after:

# CleanSlate Architecture

## Overview

CleanSlate is a **selective** artifact cleaner that removes build artifacts and caches based on two criteria:
1. File matches an artifact pattern (from `artifacts.toml`)
2. File is not tracked in version control

**This is NOT the same as `git clean`**, which removes all untracked files regardless of whether they're artifacts.

### Why Not Just Use `git clean`?

`git clean` removes **all** untracked files, including:
- New source files you're working on
- Configuration files you haven't committed yet
- Any other untracked content

CleanSlate is **surgical**: it only removes things that match known artifact patterns (like `node_modules`, `*.pyc`, `target/`, etc.), leaving your untracked work files alone.

## Layered Removal Strategy

CleanSlate uses a multi-layer decision process for whether to remove a file or directory:

### Layer 1: Pattern Matching (artifacts.toml)
- Does the file/directory path match any pattern in `artifacts.toml`?
- Patterns include: `node_modules`, `*.pyc`, `target`, `__pycache__`, etc.
- If NO match → keep the file (even if untracked)
- If match → proceed to Layer 2

### Layer 2: VCS Tracking Status
- Is the file tracked in version control (git/jj)?
- Checked via `git ls-files` or `jj file list` (NOT gitignore!)
- If tracked → keep the file (overrides pattern match)
- If untracked → proceed to Layer 3

### Layer 3: Directory Category
Based on directory type, use different performance optimizations:
- **VCS Internals**: Never traverse (`.git`, `.jj`, etc.)
- **Recreatable Dirs**: Spot-check for any tracked files (`node_modules`, `.venv`, etc.)
- **Other Dirs**: Batch-check all files

### Example Decision Tree

```
src/app.js (untracked)
  → Layer 1: No pattern match
  → Result: KEEP (not an artifact)

node_modules/lib.js (tracked in git)
  → Layer 1: Matches "node_modules" pattern ✓
  → Layer 2: Tracked in git
  → Result: KEEP (tracking overrides pattern)

node_modules/new-lib.js (untracked)
  → Layer 1: Matches "node_modules" pattern ✓
  → Layer 2: Not tracked in git ✓
  → Result: REMOVE (pattern + untracked)

.git/config
  → Layer 1: Matches VCS internals
  → Layer 3: Category 1 (VCS internal)
  → Result: SKIP (never remove)
```

## Directory Removal Strategy

### Three Directory Categories

#### Category 1: VCS Internals (Never Remove, Skip Traversal)
**Directories:** `.git`, `.jj`, `.svn`, `.hg`, `.bzr`, `_darcs`, `.pijul`, `CVS`, `.fossil`

**Strategy:** Skip during traversal entirely. These are never removable.

**Code location:** `src/main.rs:497-510`, `src/main.rs:581`

**Why:** These contain version control metadata and must never be touched.

#### Category 2: Recreatable Directories (Spot-Check, Remove if Untracked)
**Directories:** `node_modules`, `.venv`, `venv`, `env`, `target`, `__pycache__`, `.pytest_cache`, `.mypy_cache`, `.ruff_cache`, `.gradle`, `.m2`, `vendor/bundle`, `.dart_tool`, etc.

**Strategy:** These can be recreated from manifest files (package.json, requirements.txt, Cargo.toml, etc.)
- Check if directory contains ANY tracked files (single VCS call with early exit)
- If yes → skip directory entirely (unusual but valid case where someone committed node_modules)
- If no → remove entire directory without traversing contents

**Performance:** 1 VCS call vs N calls for N files (10,000x+ speedup for large directories)

**Code location:** `src/main.rs:~60` (directory list), `src/main.rs:~600-663` (handling logic)

**Why this works:** These directories are conventionally never tracked, so the spot-check almost always finds no tracked files and we can skip the expensive traversal.

#### Category 3: Other Directories (Batch-Check Contents)
**Definition:** Any directory not in categories 1 or 2.

**Strategy:**
- Batch-check all files in directory with single VCS call
- Remove untracked files that match artifact patterns
- Cleanup empty directories recursively

**Performance:** 1 VCS call per directory vs N calls for N files

**Code location:** `src/main.rs:~600-700`

**Why this is needed:** Custom project directories may contain a mix of artifacts and source files, so we need file-level granularity.

## Critical Semantic Rule: VCS Tracking vs Gitignore

### The Core Logic

**Files are removed when BOTH conditions are true:**
1. File matches an artifact pattern (defined in `artifacts.toml`)
2. File is NOT tracked in version control

This is checked in the layered approach described above.

### Why This Matters

Git and Jujutsu **only track files, not directories**:
- An empty directory cannot be committed
- To check if a directory is "tracked", we check if it contains any tracked files

### Common Pitfall: Don't Use Gitignore for Removal!

**Gitignore ≠ Untracked**

A file's gitignore status is NOT the same as its tracking status:
- **A file can be tracked even if it's in `.gitignore`** (if it was added before the ignore rule was created)
- A file can be untracked but NOT in `.gitignore`
- Gitignore only affects whether NEW files get auto-tracked

**Why this is critical:**
If someone committed `node_modules/` before adding it to `.gitignore`, those files are TRACKED. Using gitignore would incorrectly mark them for removal, potentially deleting important tracked files.

**Examples:**
```
# node_modules/lib.js is tracked in git (someone committed it)
→ KEEP (Layer 2: tracking overrides pattern)

# node_modules/new.js is untracked
→ REMOVE (Layer 1 + Layer 2: pattern + untracked)

# src/app.js is untracked
→ KEEP (Layer 1: doesn't match artifact pattern)
```

### Why Gitignore Processing is Disabled

The `ignore` crate (used via `WalkBuilder`) **is intentionally disabled** (`.git_ignore(false)`) because:

**Performance overhead with no benefit:**
- In large codebases with hundreds of `.gitignore` files, the `ignore` crate reads and parses all of them
- This adds significant I/O and CPU overhead during traversal
- Example: A directory with 455 `.gitignore` files can cause multi-minute slowdowns

**No actual benefit for CleanSlate:**
1. **We have our own patterns**: `artifacts.toml` defines what to remove, not `.gitignore`
2. **VCS directories already skipped**: The `VCS_INTERNALS` constant handles `.git`, `.jj`, etc.
3. **VCS commands are source of truth**: `git ls-files` / `jj file list` determine tracking status

**The gitignore paradox:** Using `.gitignore` to skip directories doesn't help when:
- We need to check tracking status anyway (requires VCS command)
- Our artifact patterns don't align with gitignore patterns
- The overhead of parsing gitignore files exceeds any traversal savings

## VCS Checking Strategy

### Why Spot-Check Works for Category 2

Since git/jj only track files, checking if a directory is "untracked" means:
```bash
# If this returns nothing, directory has no tracked files
git ls-files node_modules | head -1
jj file list 'node_modules' | head -1
```

This avoids traversing 10,000+ files when we only need a yes/no answer.

**Key insight:** For conventionally-untracked directories like `node_modules`, this check almost always returns nothing immediately, giving us a 10,000x speedup.

### Batch Checking for Category 3

For other directories, we need file-level granularity:
```bash
# Get all tracked files in one call
git ls-files some-directory
jj file list --ignore-working-copy 'glob:"some-directory/**"'
```

Then check each file against this cached set (O(1) lookup).

### VCS Detection Priority

When both `.jj` and `.git` are present:
1. **Prefer Jujutsu** (`.jj` takes precedence)
2. Use `jj file list --ignore-working-copy` (faster, skips snapshot)
3. Fall back to Git only if `.jj` not found

**Why prefer jj:** Per user configuration in `.claude/CLAUDE.md`, when both exist, use jj.

## Performance Impact

### Before Optimization
- **O(N) subprocess calls** where N = total files in artifact directories
- Example: `node_modules` with 10,000 files = 10,000 subprocess calls
- Result: **Hangs for minutes or hours**

### After Optimization
- **Category 1:** O(0) - skipped during traversal
- **Category 2:** O(1) subprocess call per directory (spot-check with early exit)
- **Category 3:** O(1) subprocess call per directory (batch check)
- Example: `node_modules` with 10,000 files = 1 subprocess call
- Result: **Completes in seconds**

### Expected Speedup
- Large projects: **100-10,000x speedup**
- Typical project: **10-100x speedup**

## Empty Directory Cleanup

After removing files, directories may become empty. The cleanup pass:
1. Collects all parent directories of removed files/directories
2. Sorts directories by depth (deepest first)
3. Checks if directory is empty OR only contains `.DS_Store`/`Thumbs.db`
4. Removes empty directories
5. Recursively removes parent directories that become empty

**Why this matters:** Removing files from `src/build/output/file.o` should also remove the empty `output/` and `build/` directories if they become empty.

**Code location:** `src/main.rs:~720-795`

## Time-Based Filtering Strategy

CleanSlate supports filtering artifacts by modification time using `--older-than` and `--modified-before` flags. The implementation uses a **hybrid approach** that balances performance with intuitive behavior.

### Hybrid Time Filtering

**Category 2 Directories (Recreatable)**: Uses **directory-level mtime** check
- Check the directory's modification time once before spot-checking
- If directory passes time filter → proceed with spot-check and potential removal
- If directory fails → skip entirely (mark as time_filtered)
- **Rationale:** These are atomic units treated as a whole. Directory mtime reflects recent activity within.
- **Performance:** Maintains the 10,000x speedup by avoiding file-level traversal

**Category 3 Directories (Other)**: Uses **per-file mtime** check
- Each untracked file's mtime is checked individually during traversal
- Only files that pass the time filter are added to the removal list
- **Rationale:** These directories mix artifacts with source files; per-file filtering is more intuitive
- **Performance:** Minor impact since we're already traversing to check VCS status

### Why Hybrid?

The two-tier approach optimizes for different use cases:

1. **Build artifacts** (`target/`, `node_modules/`, `.venv/`): Typically managed as units
   - "Remove this entire cache if it hasn't been touched in 30 days"
   - Directory mtime is sufficient and avoids traversal overhead

2. **Mixed directories** (custom build outputs): Need file-level precision
   - "Remove old .o files but keep recent ones"
   - Per-file mtime provides the expected behavior

### Implementation Details

**Directory-level check** (Category 2):
```rust
// Check once per directory before handling
let passes_time_filter = if time_filter.is_active() {
    if let Ok(metadata) = fs::symlink_metadata(path) {
        if let Ok(mtime) = metadata.modified() {
            time_filter.passes(mtime)
        } else { true }
    } else { true }
} else { true };
```

**Per-file check** (Category 3):
```rust
// Check each file individually during traversal
for entry in walkdir::WalkDir::new(path) {
    let file_passes_time_filter = if time_filter.is_active() {
        if let Ok(meta) = fs::symlink_metadata(file_path) {
            if let Ok(mtime) = meta.modified() {
                time_filter.passes(mtime)
            } else { true }
        } else { true }
    } else { true };

    if file_passes_time_filter {
        files_to_remove.push(file_path);
    }
}
```

### Directory mtime Semantics

On Unix-like systems, a directory's mtime updates when:
- Files are added to the directory
- Files are removed from the directory
- Files are renamed within the directory
- Directory metadata (permissions, etc.) changes

The directory mtime does NOT update when:
- File contents are modified (only the file's mtime changes)
- Subdirectories' contents change (only subdirectory's mtime changes)

For Category 2 artifacts, this is usually acceptable since installing/updating dependencies (the primary use case) modifies the directory structure.

**Code location:** `src/main.rs:~963-989` (directory-level), `src/main.rs:~1087-1100` (per-file)
